README.md, before:

Mickey R7RS Scheme
==================

Mickey Scheme is an incomplete, slow and buggy implementation of R7RS Scheme
small.

The current project goals are to

* Provide a _correct_ and _complete_ implementation of R7RS-small (WG1)
* Emphasize clarity and simplicity in the implementation
* Be a powerful platform for experimentation and creation of a more advanced
  scheme compiler.

Note that _Mickey_ is just a codeword for the early stages of this project.
The name will change as the project matures.

Current Features
----------------

  * Most core scheme functions
  * Supports 164 of 240 R7RS base library definitions
  * Quotation and quasiquotation
  * Most `let`-forms, including named let
  * Rest arguments, also known as variadic functions
  * A macro system via syntax-rules (though, it's incomplete)
  * Lazy evaluation with memoization
  * R7RS library system
  * Experimental LLVM JIT compilation (for _one_ function only, currently)
  * Tail call eliminiation (yeah, neither the JVM nor Python has that,
    so that's at least _something_ to be a little proud of!)

Some of these are demonstrated in the [example code section](#examples).

Extensions to standard Scheme and libraries
-------------------------------------------

It's extremely easy to hack on Mickey Scheme.  Because of this it has some
experimental extensions to normal R7RS scheme:

  * First class environments via the library `(mickey environment)`
    ([see examples](#environments))

Other libraries include:

  * Dynamic loading of shared libraries via `(mickey dynamic-library)`
    ([see dlopen example](#c-libraries))

Current Shortcomings
--------------------

  * It's __slow__: The code is completely interpreted, without _any_
    optimizations.  I have plans to change this.

  * It's __incomplete__: Some key Scheme features are still missing, and
    quite some R7RS library functions (currently it supports 176 of 335
    R7RS definitinos).

  * It's __buggy__: There are inherent bugs in the engine as well as
    erronous implementations of library functions.

  * It does not collect __garbage__: Currently, there is no garbage
    collector.  Adding a simple mark-and-sweep GC is trivial, though, so
    I'll get to it once I think it's important enough.

  * It doesn't support __continuations__ (yet):  I think I'll have to
    convert to continuation passing style for a proper implementation of
    this.

Compiling
---------

Run `make -j check` to perform a simple check, then `./mickey` to play with a REPL.

The project is not really release-ready, so there is no use of autotools.
The Makefile assumes you have llvm-g++ installed.  If you want to compile
using gcc, do something like:

    CXX=g++ make -ej

to compile using `g++` and in parallel.

Feature flags
-------------

  * `-DUSE_READLINE` and `-lreadline` for readline support (including TAB
     completion)

License
-------

Mickey R7RS Scheme
Copyright (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen

Distributed under version 2.1 of the Lesser GNU Public License (LGPL) while
also allowing anyone to change the license on a particular copy of the code
to the LGPL 3.0, the GPL 2.0 or the GPL 3.0.

See the file COPYING for the full text of the LGPL 2.1.

Author
------

Christian Stigen Larsen <csl@sublevel3.org> http://csl.sublevel3.org

## Examples

Here are a few example code snippets for Mickey Scheme.  

Besides demonstrating the basic capabilities of Mickey, it also serves as a
kind of soft introduction to Scheme.

First, let's start `mickey`.

    $ ./mickey
                                                                    _
    Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
    4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.9.00)    /\
    Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_
                                                                          
    Loaded 150 definitions
    Execute (exit [ code ]) to quit
    You can also (:run-test) and (list-globals)

    mickey> 

This is the REPL, or _read-evaluate-print loop_.  Now, let's type some code.

    mickey> (display "Hello, world!\n")
    Hello, world!

## Lambda

Let's play with lambdas.  First we'll create a lambda to square a
number and execute it on the fly.

    mickey> ((lambda (x) (* x x)) 12)
    144

We can it to a variable as well.  Let's bind it to the variable `square`.

    mickey> (define square (lambda (x) (* x x)))
    mickey> (square 12)
    144
    mickey> (square 3.1415)
    9.86902

Let's have some fun with lambdas.  Let's create
a function that creates other functions.

We'll create a general function `make-adder` that
creates a function that can add a static number to another
number.

    mickey> (define make-adder
              (lambda (frozen-number)
                (lambda (x)
                  (+ x frozen-number))))

As you can see, we give it a `frozen-number` and it returns
a lambda that takes a number `x` and adds the two together.

So to make a function that adds 5 to its argument, we simply
do

    mickey> (define add5 (make-adder 5))
    mickey> (add5 10)
    15

Likewise

    mickey> (define add17 (make-adder 17))
    mickey> (add17 10)
    27

Writing `(define (lambda (x) ...))` is tedious, so a
shorter variant is available:

    mickey> (define (cube x) (* x x x))
    mickey> (cube 101)
    1030301

Mickey uses GNU readline, so it offers both tab completion and history.  And
it actually works, too.  Here we write `(ca` and hit `TAB` two times to see
available definitions.

    mickey> (ca
    caaar  caadr  caar   cadr   car  

Here are `car` and `cdr`.  They extract the first and remaining items in a
list.

    mickey> (car '(1 2 3))
    1
    mickey> (cdr '(1 2 3)))
    (2 3)

I like the old school "car" and "could-er" forms because you can compose them, so that you can extract the `car`
of the `cdr` like so:

    mickey> (cadr '(1 2 3))
    2

They might not be very interesting for flat lists, but they shine for
accessing trees.

## Arithmetic

Here is some simple arithmetic.

    mickey> (+ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10)
    55

Summation of sequences can be calculated more quickly with

    mickey> (define (seq-sum n)
              (* n (/ (+ n 1) 2)))

which gives us

    mickey> (seq-sum 10)
    55
    mickey> (seq-sum 100)
    5050
    mickey> (seq-sum 127)
    8128

## Let-forms

Here is an example of the "let star" form.  It creates a local variable
scope, and evaluates them in the given order.

    mickey> (let* ((x 2)
                   (y 3)
                   (z (* x y)))
                   (display z))

This, of course, prints `6`.

There is also a `letrec` form that allows for mutually recursive
definitions.  Or in plain english, expressions that refer to each other.

The typical example of this is to implement `even?` and `odd?` in terms of
each other:

* A number is _even_ if the preceding number is odd, and
* A number is _odd_ if the preceding number is even

Since our definition is going to be mutually recursive, we need to handle
base cases of zero (negative values will make the code loop forever, though).

Let's write that out, along with a `check-number` function.

    (letrec
      ((even? (lambda (n)
                (if (zero? n) #t
                    (odd? (- n 1)))))

       (odd? (lambda (n)
               (if (zero? n) #f
                   (even? (- n 1)))))

       (check-number
         (lambda (n)
           (display `(The number ,n is ,(if (even? n) 'even 'odd)))
           (newline))))

       (check-number 2)
       (check-number 3)
       (check-number 88)
       (check-number 99))

If you run the above code in `mickey`, you'll get this output:

    (The number 2 is even)
    (The number 3 is odd)
    (The number 88 is even)
    (The number 99 is odd)

## Macros

Now, Scheme doesn't have a `when` function.  The `when` function checks
whether the first argument is true.  If it is, then it will evaluate --- or
execute --- the code given in the remaining arguments.

You can't do this with a simple function, because it would *always* evaluate
the code body.  As an example, let's say we have a boolean variable
`green-light`.  If it's `true`, we'll format the hard drive:

    (when green-light (format-drive))

If `when` was implemented as a function, it would always format the hard drive,
because function parameters must be evaluated _before_ entering the function
itself.

It is clear that we need a way to _control evaluation_.  Scheme's macros
will let ut do exactly that.

So let's implement `when` as a hygienic macro.

    mickey> (define-syntax when
              (syntax-rules ()
                ((when test expr ...)
                  (if test (begin expr ...)))))

That's it.  To demonstrate that we control the evaluation, let's create a
function with a side effect that prints to the console when it's evaluated.

    mickey> (define (say-hello) (display "Hello\n"))
    mickey> (say-hello)
    Hello

Calling

    mickey> (when #f (say-hello))

does not print anything, which is good.  In contrast,

    mickey> (when #t (say-hello))
    Hello

does indeed print to the console.

## Quotation

Now let's try some examples with quasi-quotation.  Since Scheme is a
symbolic language, we can easily create syntax trees for languages like SQL
by just using quotation.  But sometimes we'll want to embed actual
computations into them, so therefore we can use the specual `unquote` prefix
with a comma.

Here is an example of just that.

    mickey> (define (sql-get-user name)
              `(select * from user where name = ,name))

*Note*: _There is currently a bug in the mickey REPL, so that
quasiquotation requires an extra closing parenthesis to parse.  
This bug is not present if you run this example from a file, though._

Running the function should be self-explanatory.

    mickey> (sql-get-user "foo")
    (select * from user where name = "foo")

Furthermore, sometimes we want to splice two lists together when we quote.
We can do that by using unquote splice, or the `,@` prefix.

    mickey> (define date '(2012 05 17))
    mickey> date
    (2012 5 17)
    mickey> `(here is a date: ,@date)
    (here is a date: 2012 5 17)

## Lazy evaluation

Mickey Scheme also supports delayed -- or lazy -- evaluation.  That is,
computations that are not executed right away.

In fact, all languages that support evaluation control (for instance, via a
macro facility) and first class closures should be able to *implement* lazy
evaluation without any external library.

Let's create a list `queue` that contains some code we want to execute at a
later time.

    (define queue
      (list (delay (display "One! "))
            (delay (display "Three! "))
            (delay (display "Two! "))))

Now we want to execute the code in the list, but reordered so that it will
print "One! Two! Three!":

    (force (list-ref queue 0))
    (force (list-ref queue 2))
    (force (list-ref queue 1))

This outputs:

    One! Two! Three!

# Extensions

For debugging purposes, I've added some extension functions only available
to Mickey Scheme.

## (:syntax-expand _code_)

If you want to see how a macro is expanded, you can use
`(:syntax-expand ...)`.  Below is an example.

    mickey> (define-syntax my-when
              (syntax-rules ()
                  ((my-when test expr ...)
                        (if test (begin expr ...)))))
    mickey> (:syntax-expand '(my-when #t 123))
    (if #t (begin 123))
    mickey> (:syntax-expand '(my-when #f 123))
    (if #f (begin 123))

## (:debug ...)

Returns string with printable debug information.

    mickey> (display (:debug "foo"))
    adr=0x7fe501536560 type=pair    car=0x7fe501536340 cdr=0x7fe501536540
    adr=0x7fe501536340 type=string  value='foo'
    adr=0x7fe501536540 type=nil   

## (:type-of ...)

Prints what type Mickey determines the expression to be.

    mickey> (:type-of 123)
    integer
    mickey> (:type-of '())
    pair
    mickey> (:type-of "hey")
    string

## (:list->dot ...)

Convert the given expressions to Graphviz dot(1) format, which will display
a graph of the cons cells.

    mickey> (display (:list->dot '(root (left-child (left-grandchild) (right-child)))))
    digraph Scheme {
      "0x7fefeaceaca0":head -> "0x7fefeaceab40":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40":head -> "0x7fefeace9cf0" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeace9cf0" [label="root", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40":tail -> "0x7fefeaceab20":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab20":head -> "0x7fefeaceab00":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00":head -> "0x7fefeace9d50" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeace9d50" [label="left-child", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00":tail -> "0x7fefeaceaae0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0":head -> "0x7fefeacea9c0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeacea9c0":head -> "0x7fefeacea020" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeacea020" [label="left-grandchild", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeacea9c0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0":tail -> "0x7fefeaceaac0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaac0":head -> "0x7fefeaceaaa0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaaa0":head -> "0x7fefeaceaa20" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaa20" [label="right-child", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceaaa0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaac0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab20" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaca0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
    }

If you write the output to a file, you can render it with `dot(1)`:

    $ dot -Tpng -ofoo.png foo.dot

## (:closure-source ...)

Returns the quoted source for a given closure.  Example:

    mickey> (define (sq x) (* x x))
    mickey> (:closure-source sq)
    (lambda (x) (begin (* x x)))
    mickey> ((eval (:closure-source sq)) 12)
    144

## (:version)

Displays version number for Mickey and libraries.

    mickey> (display (:version)) (newline)
    (Mickey Scheme (C) 2011 Christian Stigen Larsen
     Using Readline 4.2
      Compiler version: 4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build
      2336.9.00)
      )

## (:exit _code_)

Exit Mickey, returning given code to the parent process.

## Environments

Mickey Scheme has an experimental library for first-class environments.
It bascially implements the API from MIT Scheme, with a few missing
features.

Here is an example on how to use it.

First, let's start up mickey with an empty environment (the -z argument).
An empty environment means that the REPL only has one definition, that of
`import`.  We need `import` because to do anything, we need to be able to
import libraries.

    csl$ ./mickey -z
    #|                                                                 _
       Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
       4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.11.00)   /\
       Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_

       To quit, hit CTRL+D or type (exit).  Use (help) for an
       introduction.
    |#

Now, let's just make sure that we don't have any binding for `foo`.

    #; mickey> foo
    Unbound definition: foo

Let's import the `(mickey environment)` library and define `foo` in a new
environment that is a child of the current one.

    #; mickey> (import (mickey environment))
    #; mickey> (define sub-environment
                         (make-environment
                           (define foo 123)))

We still should not see `foo` in the current environment:

    #; mickey> foo
    Unbound definition: foo

But it should be available in the environment we have stored in the variable
`sub-environment`.

    #; mickey> (environment-bindings sub-environment)
    ((foo 123))

Let's import the `(scheme write)` library so we can call `display`, and then
only the `newline` function from `(scheme base)`.

    #; mickey> (import (scheme write))
    #; mickey> (import (only (scheme base) newline))

Now, let's evaluate an expression in the child environment to print the
value of `foo`:

    #; mickey> (environment-eval 
                 (begin
                   (display foo)
                   (newline)) sub-environment)
    123
    #; mickey> ^D

So, what's the point with first class environments?  You can use it do to
stuff like implementing your own module system.  The reason they are not
part of standard Scheme is because they make it very difficult to reason
about what a program does just by reading the code.

Therefore, implementations are allowed to implement them on their own.

## C-libraries

It's possible to write libraries in C and call them from Mickey Scheme.

Since Mickey does not use a build system yet, the process is a little bit
cumbersome.

First you write a small library in C.  Let's say we want to be able to call
the `uname(3)` function from Mickey.  We'll just write some wrapper code in
C:

    #include <sys/utsname.h>
    #include "mickey.h"

    extern "C" cons_t* proc_uname(cons_t* args, environment_t* env)
    {
      struct utsname p;

      if ( uname(&p) != 0 )
        return boolean(false);

      // Return utsname as an associative list
      return
        cons(cons(symbol("sysname",  NULL), cons(string(p.sysname))),
        cons(cons(symbol("nodename", NULL), cons(string(p.nodename))),
        cons(cons(symbol("release",  NULL), cons(string(p.release))),
        cons(cons(symbol("version",  NULL), cons(string(p.version))),
        cons(cons(symbol("machine",  NULL), cons(string(p.machine))))))));
    }

Note that if you use a C++ compiler with the above code, you must prefix the
function with `extern "C"` to avoid the infamous C++ name-mangling.

To compile this, do something à la

    gcc -shared -fPIC -I<mickey path> mickey-uname.c \
        -L<mickey path> -lmickey -o libmickey-uname.so

This should give you a libmickey-uname.so file.  To load this file from
Mickey, we have to start mickey and then import the `(mickey
dynamic-library)` library.

    csl$ ./mickey
    #|                                                                 _
       Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
       4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.11.00)   /\
       Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_

       To quit, hit CTRL+D or type (exit).  Use (help) for an
       introduction.
    |#

    #; mickey> (import (mickey dynamic-library))

Let's load the library using the dlopen options `RTLD_NOW` and `RTLD_LOCAL`.
You can omit the options to use default dlopen mode.  I'm just showing you
how to specify several options.

    #; mickey> (define lib-uname (dlopen "libmickey-uname.so" 'now 'local))

Now `lib-uname` contains a handle to the library.

    #; mickey> lib-uname
    #<pointer 'dynamic-shared-library-handle' 0x7ffb63436460>

Let's get a reference to the `proc_uname` function and bind that to the
variable `uname`:

    #; mickey> (define uname (dlsym lib-uname "proc_uname"))

If `dlsym` fails, it will return `#f`.  Let's see if it worked:

    #; mickey> uname
    #<closure 0x7ffb6343b550>

It did!  Let's try executing it.

    #; mickey> (uname)
     ((sysname "Darwin") (nodename "Christians-mac-8.local") (release "12.0.0")
     (version "Darwin Kernel Version 12.0.0: Sun Jun 24 23:00:16 PDT 2012;
     root:xnu-2050.7.9~1/RELEASE_X86_64") (machine "x86_64"))

It returns the struct as an a-list, so we can do

    #; mickey> (assv 'version (uname))
    (version "Darwin Kernel Version 12.0.0: Sun Jun 24 23:00:16 PDT 2012;
    root:xnu-2050.7.9~1/RELEASE_X86_64")

and

    #; mickey> (assv 'machine (uname))
    (machine "x86_64")

Easy!

Commit message:

Renamed library to (unix dlopen)

README.md, after:

Mickey R7RS Scheme
==================

Mickey Scheme is an incomplete, slow and buggy implementation of R7RS Scheme
small.

The current project goals are to

* Provide a _correct_ and _complete_ implementation of R7RS-small (WG1)
* Emphasize clarity and simplicity in the implementation
* Be a powerful platform for experimentation and creation of a more advanced
  scheme compiler.

Note that _Mickey_ is just a codeword for the early stages of this project.
The name will change as the project matures.

Current Features
----------------

  * Most core scheme functions
  * Supports 164 of 240 R7RS base library definitions
  * Quotation and quasiquotation
  * Most `let`-forms, including named let
  * Rest arguments, also known as variadic functions
  * A macro system via syntax-rules (though, it's incomplete)
  * Lazy evaluation with memoization
  * R7RS library system
  * Experimental LLVM JIT compilation (for _one_ function only, currently)
  * Tail call eliminiation (yeah, neither the JVM nor Python has that,
    so that's at least _something_ to be a little proud of!)

Some of these are demonstrated in the [example code section](#examples).

Extensions to standard Scheme and libraries
-------------------------------------------

It's extremely easy to hack on Mickey Scheme.  Because of this it has some
experimental extensions to normal R7RS scheme:

  * First class environments via the library `(mickey environment)`
    ([see examples](#environments))

Other libraries include:

  * Dynamic loading of shared libraries via `(unix dlopen)`
    ([see dlopen example](#c-libraries))

Current Shortcomings
--------------------

  * It's __slow__: The code is completely interpreted, without _any_
    optimizations.  I have plans to change this.

  * It's __incomplete__: Some key Scheme features are still missing, and
    quite some R7RS library functions (currently it supports 176 of 335
    R7RS definitinos).

  * It's __buggy__: There are inherent bugs in the engine as well as
    erronous implementations of library functions.

  * It does not collect __garbage__: Currently, there is no garbage
    collector.  Adding a simple mark-and-sweep GC is trivial, though, so
    I'll get to it once I think it's important enough.

  * It doesn't support __continuations__ (yet):  I think I'll have to
    convert to continuation passing style for a proper implementation of
    this.

Compiling
---------

Run `make -j check` to perform a simple check, then `./mickey` to play with a REPL.

The project is not really release-ready, so there is no use of autotools.
The Makefile assumes you have llvm-g++ installed.  If you want to compile
using gcc, do something like:

    CXX=g++ make -ej

to compile using `g++` and in parallel.

Feature flags
-------------

  * `-DUSE_READLINE` and `-lreadline` for readline support (including TAB
     completion)

License
-------

Mickey R7RS Scheme
Copyright (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen

Distributed under version 2.1 of the Lesser GNU Public License (LGPL) while
also allowing anyone to change the license on a particular copy of the code
to the LGPL 3.0, the GPL 2.0 or the GPL 3.0.

See the file COPYING for the full text of the LGPL 2.1.

Author
------

Christian Stigen Larsen <csl@sublevel3.org> http://csl.sublevel3.org

## Examples

Here are a few example code snippets for Mickey Scheme.  

Besides demonstrating the basic capabilities of Mickey, it also serves as a
kind of soft introduction to Scheme.

First, let's start `mickey`.

    $ ./mickey
                                                                    _
    Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
    4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.9.00)    /\
    Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_
                                                                          
    Loaded 150 definitions
    Execute (exit [ code ]) to quit
    You can also (:run-test) and (list-globals)

    mickey> 

This is the REPL, or _read-evaluate-print loop_.  Now, let's type some code.

    mickey> (display "Hello, world!\n")
    Hello, world!

## Lambda

Let's play with lambdas.  First we'll create a lambda to square a
number and execute it on the fly.

    mickey> ((lambda (x) (* x x)) 12)
    144

We can it to a variable as well.  Let's bind it to the variable `square`.

    mickey> (define square (lambda (x) (* x x)))
    mickey> (square 12)
    144
    mickey> (square 3.1415)
    9.86902

Let's have some fun with lambdas.  Let's create
a function that creates other functions.

We'll create a general function `make-adder` that
creates a function that can add a static number to another
number.

    mickey> (define make-adder
              (lambda (frozen-number)
                (lambda (x)
                  (+ x frozen-number))))

As you can see, we give it a `frozen-number` and it returns
a lambda that takes a number `x` and adds the two together.

So to make a function that adds 5 to its argument, we simply
do

    mickey> (define add5 (make-adder 5))
    mickey> (add5 10)
    15

Likewise

    mickey> (define add17 (make-adder 17))
    mickey> (add17 10)
    27

Writing `(define (lambda (x) ...))` is tedious, so a
shorter variant is available:

    mickey> (define (cube x) (* x x x))
    mickey> (cube 101)
    1030301

Mickey uses GNU readline, so it offers both tab completion and history.  And
it actually works, too.  Here we write `(ca` and hit `TAB` two times to see
available definitions.

    mickey> (ca
    caaar  caadr  caar   cadr   car  

Here are `car` and `cdr`.  They extract the first and remaining items in a
list.

    mickey> (car '(1 2 3))
    1
    mickey> (cdr '(1 2 3)))
    (2 3)

I like the old school "car" and "could-er" forms because you can compose them, so that you can extract the `car`
of the `cdr` like so:

    mickey> (cadr '(1 2 3))
    2

They might not be very interesting for flat lists, but they shine for
accessing trees.

## Arithmetic

Here is some simple arithmetic.

    mickey> (+ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10)
    55

Summation of sequences can be calculated more quickly with

    mickey> (define (seq-sum n)
              (* n (/ (+ n 1) 2)))

which gives us

    mickey> (seq-sum 10)
    55
    mickey> (seq-sum 100)
    5050
    mickey> (seq-sum 127)
    8128

## Let-forms

Here is an example of the "let star" form.  It creates a local variable
scope, and evaluates them in the given order.

    mickey> (let* ((x 2)
                   (y 3)
                   (z (* x y)))
                   (display z))

This, of course, prints `6`.

There is also a `letrec` form that allows for mutually recursive
definitions.  Or in plain english, expressions that refer to each other.

The typical example of this is to implement `even?` and `odd?` in terms of
each other:

* A number is _even_ if the preceding number is odd, and
* A number is _odd_ if the preceding number is even

Since our definition is going to be mutually recursive, we need to handle
base cases of zero (negative values will make the code loop forever, though).

Let's write that out, along with a `check-number` function.

    (letrec
      ((even? (lambda (n)
                (if (zero? n) #t
                    (odd? (- n 1)))))

       (odd? (lambda (n)
               (if (zero? n) #f
                   (even? (- n 1)))))

       (check-number
         (lambda (n)
           (display `(The number ,n is ,(if (even? n) 'even 'odd)))
           (newline))))

       (check-number 2)
       (check-number 3)
       (check-number 88)
       (check-number 99))

If you run the above code in `mickey`, you'll get this output:

    (The number 2 is even)
    (The number 3 is odd)
    (The number 88 is even)
    (The number 99 is odd)

## Macros

Now, Scheme doesn't have a `when` function.  The `when` function checks
whether the first argument is true.  If it is, then it will evaluate --- or
execute --- the code given in the remaining arguments.

You can't do this with a simple function, because it would *always* evaluate
the code body.  As an example, let's say we have a boolean variable
`green-light`.  If it's `true`, we'll format the hard drive:

    (when green-light (format-drive))

If `when` was implemented as a function, it would always format the hard drive,
because function parameters must be evaluated _before_ entering the function
itself.

It is clear that we need a way to _control evaluation_.  Scheme's macros
will let ut do exactly that.

So let's implement `when` as a hygienic macro.

    mickey> (define-syntax when
              (syntax-rules ()
                ((when test expr ...)
                  (if test (begin expr ...)))))

That's it.  To demonstrate that we control the evaluation, let's create a
function with a side effect that prints to the console when it's evaluated.

    mickey> (define (say-hello) (display "Hello\n"))
    mickey> (say-hello)
    Hello

Calling

    mickey> (when #f (say-hello))

does not print anything, which is good.  In contrast,

    mickey> (when #t (say-hello))
    Hello

does indeed print to the console.

## Quotation

Now let's try some examples with quasi-quotation.  Since Scheme is a
symbolic language, we can easily create syntax trees for languages like SQL
by just using quotation.  But sometimes we'll want to embed actual
computations into them, so therefore we can use the specual `unquote` prefix
with a comma.

Here is an example of just that.

    mickey> (define (sql-get-user name)
              `(select * from user where name = ,name))

*Note*: _There is currently a bug in the mickey REPL, so that
quasiquotation requires an extra closing parenthesis to parse.  
This bug is not present if you run this example from a file, though._

Running the function should be self-explanatory.

    mickey> (sql-get-user "foo")
    (select * from user where name = "foo")

Furthermore, sometimes we want to splice two lists together when we quote.
We can do that by using unquote splice, or the `,@` prefix.

    mickey> (define date '(2012 05 17))
    mickey> date
    (2012 5 17)
    mickey> `(here is a date: ,@date)
    (here is a date: 2012 5 17)

## Lazy evaluation

Mickey Scheme also supports delayed -- or lazy -- evaluation.  That is,
computations that are not executed right away.

In fact, all languages that support evaluation control (for instance, via a
macro facility) and first class closures should be able to *implement* lazy
evaluation without any external library.

Let's create a list `queue` that contains some code we want to execute at a
later time.

    (define queue
      (list (delay (display "One! "))
            (delay (display "Three! "))
            (delay (display "Two! "))))

Now we want to execute the code in the list, but reordered so that it will
print "One! Two! Three!":

    (force (list-ref queue 0))
    (force (list-ref queue 2))
    (force (list-ref queue 1))

This outputs:

    One! Two! Three!

# Extensions

For debugging purposes, I've added some extension functions only available
to Mickey Scheme.

## (:syntax-expand _code_)

If you want to see how a macro is expanded, you can use
`(:syntax-expand ...)`.  Below is an example.

    mickey> (define-syntax my-when
              (syntax-rules ()
                  ((my-when test expr ...)
                        (if test (begin expr ...)))))
    mickey> (:syntax-expand '(my-when #t 123))
    (if #t (begin 123))
    mickey> (:syntax-expand '(my-when #f 123))
    (if #f (begin 123))

## (:debug ...)

Returns string with printable debug information.

    mickey> (display (:debug "foo"))
    adr=0x7fe501536560 type=pair    car=0x7fe501536340 cdr=0x7fe501536540
    adr=0x7fe501536340 type=string  value='foo'
    adr=0x7fe501536540 type=nil   

## (:type-of ...)

Prints what type Mickey determines the expression to be.

    mickey> (:type-of 123)
    integer
    mickey> (:type-of '())
    pair
    mickey> (:type-of "hey")
    string

## (:list->dot ...)

Convert the given expressions to Graphviz dot(1) format, which will display
a graph of the cons cells.

    mickey> (display (:list->dot '(root (left-child (left-grandchild) (right-child)))))
    digraph Scheme {
      "0x7fefeaceaca0":head -> "0x7fefeaceab40":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40":head -> "0x7fefeace9cf0" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeace9cf0" [label="root", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40":tail -> "0x7fefeaceab20":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab20":head -> "0x7fefeaceab00":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00":head -> "0x7fefeace9d50" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeace9d50" [label="left-child", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00":tail -> "0x7fefeaceaae0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0":head -> "0x7fefeacea9c0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeacea9c0":head -> "0x7fefeacea020" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeacea020" [label="left-grandchild", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeacea9c0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0":tail -> "0x7fefeaceaac0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaac0":head -> "0x7fefeaceaaa0":head ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaaa0":head -> "0x7fefeaceaa20" ["ol"="box"];
      "0x7fefeaceaa20" [label="right-child", shape="none"];
      "0x7fefeaceaaa0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaac0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaae0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab00" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab20" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceab40" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
      "0x7fefeaceaca0" [label="<head>|<tail>", shape="record"];
    }

If you write the output to a file, you can render it with `dot(1)`:

    $ dot -Tpng -ofoo.png foo.dot

## (:closure-source ...)

Returns the quoted source for a given closure.  Example:

    mickey> (define (sq x) (* x x))
    mickey> (:closure-source sq)
    (lambda (x) (begin (* x x)))
    mickey> ((eval (:closure-source sq)) 12)
    144

## (:version)

Displays version number for Mickey and libraries.

    mickey> (display (:version)) (newline)
    (Mickey Scheme (C) 2011 Christian Stigen Larsen
     Using Readline 4.2
      Compiler version: 4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build
      2336.9.00)
      )

## (:exit _code_)

Exit Mickey, returning given code to the parent process.

## Environments

Mickey Scheme has an experimental library for first-class environments.
It bascially implements the API from MIT Scheme, with a few missing
features.

Here is an example on how to use it.

First, let's start up mickey with an empty environment (the -z argument).
An empty environment means that the REPL only has one definition, that of
`import`.  We need `import` because to do anything, we need to be able to
import libraries.

    csl$ ./mickey -z
    #|                                                                 _
       Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
       4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.11.00)   /\
       Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_

       To quit, hit CTRL+D or type (exit).  Use (help) for an
       introduction.
    |#

Now, let's just make sure that we don't have any binding for `foo`.

    #; mickey> foo
    Unbound definition: foo

Let's import the `(mickey environment)` library and define `foo` in a new
environment that is a child of the current one.

    #; mickey> (import (mickey environment))
    #; mickey> (define sub-environment
                         (make-environment
                           (define foo 123)))

We still should not see `foo` in the current environment:

    #; mickey> foo
    Unbound definition: foo

But it should be available in the environment we have stored in the variable
`sub-environment`.

    #; mickey> (environment-bindings sub-environment)
    ((foo 123))

Let's import the `(scheme write)` library so we can call `display`, and then
only the `newline` function from `(scheme base)`.

    #; mickey> (import (scheme write))
    #; mickey> (import (only (scheme base) newline))

Now, let's evaluate an expression in the child environment to print the
value of `foo`:

    #; mickey> (environment-eval 
                 (begin
                   (display foo)
                   (newline)) sub-environment)
    123
    #; mickey> ^D

So, what's the point with first class environments?  You can use it do to
stuff like implementing your own module system.  The reason they are not
part of standard Scheme is because they make it very difficult to reason
about what a program does just by reading the code.

Therefore, implementations are allowed to implement them on their own.

## C-libraries

It's possible to write libraries in C and call them from Mickey Scheme.

Since Mickey does not use a build system yet, the process is a little bit
cumbersome.

First you write a small library in C.  Let's say we want to be able to call
the `uname(3)` function from Mickey.  We'll just write some wrapper code in
C:

    #include <sys/utsname.h>
    #include "mickey.h"

    extern "C" cons_t* proc_uname(cons_t* args, environment_t* env)
    {
      struct utsname p;

      if ( uname(&p) != 0 )
        return boolean(false);

      // Return utsname as an associative list
      return
        cons(cons(symbol("sysname",  NULL), cons(string(p.sysname))),
        cons(cons(symbol("nodename", NULL), cons(string(p.nodename))),
        cons(cons(symbol("release",  NULL), cons(string(p.release))),
        cons(cons(symbol("version",  NULL), cons(string(p.version))),
        cons(cons(symbol("machine",  NULL), cons(string(p.machine))))))));
    }

Note that if you use a C++ compiler with the above code, you must prefix the
function with `extern "C"` to avoid the infamous C++ name-mangling.

To compile this, do something à la

    gcc -shared -fPIC -I<mickey path> mickey-uname.c \
        -L<mickey path> -lmickey -o libmickey-uname.so

This should give you a libmickey-uname.so file.  To load this file from
Mickey, we have to start mickey and then import the `(unix dlopen)` library.

    csl$ ./mickey
    #|                                                                 _
       Mickey Scheme (C) 2011-2012 Christian Stigen Larsen              \
       4.2.1 (Based on Apple Inc. build 5658) (LLVM build 2336.11.00)   /\
       Readline 4.2                                                    /  \_

       To quit, hit CTRL+D or type (exit).  Use (help) for an
       introduction.
    |#

    #; mickey> (import (unix dlopen))

Let's load the library using the dlopen options `RTLD_NOW` and `RTLD_LOCAL`.
You can omit the options to use default dlopen mode.  I'm just showing you
how to specify several options.

    #; mickey> (define lib-uname (dlopen "libmickey-uname.so" 'now 'local))

Now `lib-uname` contains a handle to the library.

    #; mickey> lib-uname
    #<pointer 'dynamic-shared-library-handle' 0x7ffb63436460>

Let's get a reference to the `proc_uname` function and bind that to the
variable `uname`:

    #; mickey> (define uname (dlsym lib-uname "proc_uname"))

If `dlsym` fails, it will return `#f`.  Let's see if it worked:

    #; mickey> uname
    #<closure 0x7ffb6343b550>

It did!  Let's try executing it.

    #; mickey> (uname)
     ((sysname "Darwin") (nodename "Christians-mac-8.local") (release "12.0.0")
     (version "Darwin Kernel Version 12.0.0: Sun Jun 24 23:00:16 PDT 2012;
     root:xnu-2050.7.9~1/RELEASE_X86_64") (machine "x86_64"))

It returns the struct as an a-list, so we can do

    #; mickey> (assv 'version (uname))
    (version "Darwin Kernel Version 12.0.0: Sun Jun 24 23:00:16 PDT 2012;
    root:xnu-2050.7.9~1/RELEASE_X86_64")

and

    #; mickey> (assv 'machine (uname))
    (machine "x86_64")

Easy!
